[docs] add deep dive on overriding job variables (#12033)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/guides/deployment/overriding-job-variables.md

# Deeper Dive: Overriding Work Pool Job Variables

> As you might have read in [Deploying Flows to Work Pools and Workers](/guides/prefect-deploy/) guide, there are two ways to deploy flows to work pools: using a `prefect.yaml` file or using the `.deploy()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in the [Deploying Flows to Work Pools and Workers](/guides/prefect-deploy/) guide, there are two ways to deploy flows to work pools: using a `prefect.yaml` file or using the `.deploy()` method.
```

**In both cases, you can override job variables on a work pool for a given deployment.**

While exactly _which_ job variables are available to be overridden depend on the type of work pool you're using at a given time, this guide will explore some common patterns for overriding job variables in both deployment methods.

## Background

> First of all, what do we mean by _"job variables"_?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, what are _"job variables"_?
```

> First of all, what do we mean by _"job variables"_?

Author: more color
```suggestion
First of all, what do we mean by _"job variables"_?

Job variables are just infrastructure related values that are configurable on a work pool, which may be relevant to how your flow run executes on your infrastructure.
```

> Let's use `env` as an example, because it's the only job variable that is available to configure for all work pool types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use `env` - the only job variable that is configurable for all work pool types - as an example.
```

When you create or edit a work pool, you can specify a set of environment variables that will be set in the runtime environment of the flow run.

For example, you might want a certain deployment to have the following environment variables available:
```json
{
  "EXECUTION_ENV": "staging",
  "MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG": "some-value",
}
```

> So, as opposed to hardcoding these values into your work pool in the UI (so that they would apply to all deployments associated with that work pool), you can override these values on a _per-deployment basis_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, as opposed to hardcoding these values into your work pool in the UI and making them available to all deployments associated with that work pool, you can override these values on a _per-deployment basis_.
```

Let's look at how to do that.

> ## Setup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How to override job variables
```

Author: updated in [72147fb](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/12033/commits/72147fb9aa10088c247bbca378fa0ba1059be314)

Say we have the following repo structure:
```
» tree
.
├── README.md
├── requirements.txt
├── demo_project
│   ├── daily_flow.py
```

... and we have some `demo_flow.py` file like this:

```python
import os
from prefect import flow, task

@task
def do_something_important(not_so_secret_value: str) -> None:
    print(f"Doing something important with {not_so_secret_value}!")

@flow(log_prints=True)
def some_work():
    environment = os.environ.get("EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT", "local")
    
    print(f"Coming to you live from {environment}!")
    
    not_so_secret_value = os.environ.get("MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG")
    
    if not_so_secret_value is None:
        raise ValueError("You forgot to set MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG!")

    do_something_important(not_so_secret_value)
```

> ## How to override job variables

Reviewer 2: and then remove this

Author: updated in [72147fb](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/12033/commits/72147fb9aa10088c247bbca378fa0ba1059be314)

### Using a `prefect.yaml` file
In this case, let's also say we have the following deployment definition in a `prefect.yaml` file at the root of our repository:
```yaml
deployments:
- name: demo-deployment
  entrypoint: demo_project/demo_flow.py:some_work
  work_pool:
    name: local
  schedule: null
```

!!! note
    While not the focus of this guide, note that this deployment definition uses a default "global" `pull` step, because one is not explicitly defined. For reference, here's what that would look like at the top of the `prefect.yaml` file:
    ```yaml
    pull:
    - prefect.deployments.steps.git_clone: &clone_repo
        repository: https://github.com/some-user/prefect-monorepo
        branch: main
    ```

To provide the `EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT` and `MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG` environment variables to this deployment, we can add a `job_variables` section to our deployment definition in the `prefect.yaml` file:

#### Hard-coded job variables
```yaml
deployments:
- name: demo-deployment
  entrypoint: demo_project/demo_flow.py:some_work
  work_pool:
    name: local
    job_variables:
        env:

>         EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT: staging

Reviewer 2: these should be indented. verify with https://onlineyamltools.com/convert-yaml-to-json

Reviewer 2: the env vars themselves, I mean

Author: updated in [72147fb](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/12033/commits/72147fb9aa10088c247bbca378fa0ba1059be314)

        MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG: plumbus
  schedule: null
```

... and then run `prefect deploy -n demo-deployment` to deploy the flow with these job variables.

We should then be able to see the job variables in the `Configuration` tab of the deployment in the UI:

![Job variables in the UI](/img/guides/job-variables.png)

#### Using existing environment variables

> If you want to use environment variables that are already set in your local environment, you can template these in the `prefect.yaml` file using the `{{ env.VARIABLE_NAME }}` syntax:

Author: ack
```suggestion
If you want to use environment variables that are already set in your local environment, you can template these in the `prefect.yaml` file using the `{{ $$ENV_VAR_NAME }}` syntax:
```

```yaml
deployments:
- name: demo-deployment
  entrypoint: demo_project/demo_flow.py:some_work
  work_pool:
    name: local
    job_variables:
        env:

>         EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT: "{{ $EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT }}"

Reviewer 2: same here

Author: updated in [72147fb](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/12033/commits/72147fb9aa10088c247bbca378fa0ba1059be314)

# Deeper Dive: Overriding Work Pool Job Variables

As you might have read in [Deploying Flows to Work Pools and Workers](/guides/prefect-deploy/) guide, there are two ways to deploy flows to work pools: using a `prefect.yaml` file or using the `.deploy()` method.

**In both cases, you can override job variables on a work pool for a given deployment.**

While exactly _which_ job variables are available to be overridden depend on the type of work pool you're using at a given time, this guide will explore some common patterns for overriding job variables in both deployment methods.

## Background
First of all, what do we mean by _"job variables"_?

Job variables are just infrastructure related values that are configurable on a work pool, which may be relevant to how your flow run executes on your infrastructure.

> Let's use `env` as an example, because it's the only job variable that is available to configure for all work pool types.

Author: vertical break
```suggestion
<hr>

Let's use `env` as an example, because it's the only job variable that is available to configure for all work pool types.
```

> # Deeper Dive: Overriding Work Pool Job Variables

Reviewer 3: thoughts on renaming this to "2 Dive 2 Deep"?

Author: 😂

As described in the [Deploying Flows to Work Pools and Workers](/guides/prefect-deploy/) guide, there are two ways to deploy flows to work pools: using a `prefect.yaml` file or using the `.deploy()` method.

**In both cases, you can override job variables on a work pool for a given deployment.**

While exactly _which_ job variables are available to be overridden depend on the type of work pool you're using at a given time, this guide will explore some common patterns for overriding job variables in both deployment methods.

## Background
First of all, what are _"job variables"_?

> Job variables are just infrastructure related values that are configurable on a work pool, which may be relevant to how your flow run executes on your infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Job variables are infrastructure related values that are configurable on a work pool, which may be relevant to how your flow run executes on your infrastructure.
```

<hr>

Let's use `env` - the only job variable that is configurable for all work pool types - as an example.

When you create or edit a work pool, you can specify a set of environment variables that will be set in the runtime environment of the flow run.

For example, you might want a certain deployment to have the following environment variables available:
```json
{
  "EXECUTION_ENV": "staging",
  "MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG": "plumbus",
}
```

> So, as opposed to hardcoding these values into your work pool in the UI and making them available to all deployments associated with that work pool, you can override these values on a _per-deployment basis_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rather than hardcoding these values into your work pool in the UI and making them available to all deployments associated with that work pool, you can override these values on a _per-deployment basis_.
```

Let's look at how to do that.

## How to override job variables
Say we have the following repo structure:
```

> » tree

Reviewer 2: Not everyone will know `tree`, so maybe leave that off but keep the tree viz

Author: imo this is fine, its obvious what its doing and if we educate a person about a useful command then that doesn't hurt

Reviewer 2: you win

.
├── README.md
├── requirements.txt
├── demo_project
│   ├── daily_flow.py
```

... and we have some `demo_flow.py` file like this:

```python
import os
from prefect import flow, task

@task
def do_something_important(not_so_secret_value: str) -> None:
    print(f"Doing something important with {not_so_secret_value}!")

@flow(log_prints=True)
def some_work():
    environment = os.environ.get("EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT", "local")
    
    print(f"Coming to you live from {environment}!")
    
    not_so_secret_value = os.environ.get("MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG")
    
    if not_so_secret_value is None:
        raise ValueError("You forgot to set MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG!")

    do_something_important(not_so_secret_value)
```
### Using a `prefect.yaml` file
In this case, let's also say we have the following deployment definition in a `prefect.yaml` file at the root of our repository:
```yaml
deployments:
- name: demo-deployment
  entrypoint: demo_project/demo_flow.py:some_work
  work_pool:
    name: local
  schedule: null
```

!!! note

>     While not the focus of this guide, note that this deployment definition uses a default "global" `pull` step, because one is not explicitly defined. For reference, here's what that would look like at the top of the `prefect.yaml` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    While not the focus of this guide, note that this deployment definition uses a default "global" `pull` step, because one is not explicitly defined on the deployment. For reference, here's what that would look like at the top of the `prefect.yaml` file:
```

Author: nice catch

    ```yaml
    pull:
    - prefect.deployments.steps.git_clone: &clone_repo
        repository: https://github.com/some-user/prefect-monorepo
        branch: main
    ```

> To provide the `EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT` and `MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG` environment variables to this deployment, we can add a `job_variables` section to our deployment definition in the `prefect.yaml` file:

Reviewer 2: Move the `#### Hard-coded job variables` above the sentence here

Author: addressed in [4685a39](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/12033/commits/4685a39edd85cdecffaf7abcb2c5f224c13b3c59)

#### Hard-coded job variables
```yaml
deployments:
- name: demo-deployment
  entrypoint: demo_project/demo_flow.py:some_work
  work_pool:
    name: local
    job_variables:
        env:
            EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT: staging

>             MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG: plumbus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG: some-value
```

Author: ![image](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/assets/31014960/7f104467-3575-444e-a94c-4a25b0c3e622)

Reviewer 2: lol then make it plumbus everywhere. I don't care what the value is but make it the same throughout the doc

Author: [81451f9](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/12033/commits/81451f99e289a6a917c97c09d041f94cc7d49d44)

  schedule: null
```

... and then run `prefect deploy -n demo-deployment` to deploy the flow with these job variables.

We should then be able to see the job variables in the `Configuration` tab of the deployment in the UI:

![Job variables in the UI](/img/guides/job-variables.png)

#### Using existing environment variables
If you want to use environment variables that are already set in your local environment, you can template these in the `prefect.yaml` file using the `{{ $ENV_VAR_NAME }}` syntax:

```yaml
deployments:
- name: demo-deployment
  entrypoint: demo_project/demo_flow.py:some_work
  work_pool:
    name: local
    job_variables:
        env:
            EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT: "{{ $EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT }}"
            MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG: "{{ $MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG }}"
  schedule: null
```

!!! note

>     This assumes that the machine where `prefect deploy` in run would have these environment variables set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This assumes that the machine where `prefect deploy` is run would have these environment variables set.
```

We could add the following block to our `demo_project/daily_flow.py` file from the setup section:
```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    flow.from_source(
        source="https://github.com/zzstoatzz/prefect-monorepo.git",
        entrypoint="src/demo_project/demo_flow.py:some_work"
    ).deploy(
        name="demo-deployment",
        work_pool_name="local", # can only .deploy() to a local work pool in prefect>=2.15.1
        job_variables={
            "env": {
                "EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT": os.environ.get("EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT", "local"),
                "MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG": os.environ.get("MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG")
            }
        }
    )
```

!!! note
    The above example works assuming a couple things:
    - the machine where this script is run would have these environment variables set.
    <div class="terminal">
    ```bash
    export EXECUTION_ENVIRONMENT=staging
    export MY_NOT_SO_SECRET_CONFIG=plumbus
    ```
    </div>

    - `demo_project/daily_flow.py` _already exists_ in the repository at the specified path

Running this script with something like:
<div class="terminal">
```bash
python demo_project/daily_flow.py
```
</div>

> ... should deploy the flow with the specified job variables, which should then be visible in the UI under the `Configuration` tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
... will deploy the flow with the specified job variables, which should then be visible in the UI under the `Configuration` tab.
```
